---
tags: fc, softeng
course: Software Engineering I
---

# What is information technology

combination of hardware, software, and services that people use to manage, communicate, and share information ;; information technology (IT)

step-by-step process for developing high-quality information systems ;; systems analysis and design

combines technology, people, and data to provide support for business functions such as order processing, inventory control, human resources, accounting, and many more. ;; information system

valued member of the IT department team who helps plan, develop, and maintain information systems. ;; systems analyst

# Information System Components

set of related components that produces specific results ;; system

a system, one that is vital to a company's operation. e.g. order processing system ;; mission-critical system

basic facts that are the system's raw material ;; data

data that has been transformed into output that is valuable to users ;; information

five key components of information systems
,,
- hardware
- software
- data 
- processes
- people

consists of everything in the physical layer of the information system ;; hardware

examples of hardware
,,
- servers
- workstations
- networks
- telecomms equipment
- fiber-optic cables
- mobile devices
- scanners, 
- etc.

a large concentration of servers working together ;; server farm

Moore's law
,,
- conceptualized in 1965 by Gordon Moore, cofounder of intel
- predicted that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit chip would double about every 24 months

refers to the programs that control the hardware and produce the desired information or results ;; software

manages hardware components, which can include a single computer or a global network with many thousands of clients ;; system software

consists of programs that suppot day-to-day business functions and provide users with the information they need ;; application software

enterprise applications
,,
- company-wide applications
- includes processing systems, payroll systems, and company communications networks

a system, such as an inventory or a payroll application, that can be adapted for use in many different types of companies ;; horizontal system

a system designed to meet the unique requirements of a specific business or industry, such as an online retailer, a medical practice, or an auto dealership ;; vertical system

older systems (should there ever be one) used in a company that needs to be interfaced with new systems ;; legacy systems

an information system can store data in various locations, called ==tables==

describes the tasks and business functions that users, managers, and IT staff memebers perform to achieve specific results ;; processes

building blocks of an information system; represents actual day-to-day business operations ;; processes

people who have an interest in an information system ;; stakeholders

stakeholders include
,,
- the management group responsible for the system
- the users or end users inside and outside the company who will interact with the system
- IT staff members; e.g. systems analysts, programmers, andnetwork administrators who develop and support the system

# Business Today

business today is being shaped by three major trends
,,
- rapidly increasing globalization
- technology integration for seamless information access across a wide variety of devices
- rapid growth of cloud-based computing and software services

Internet-based commerce is called ==ecommerce (electronic commerce)==

two main sectors of ecommerce
,,
- B2C (business-to-consumer)
- B2B (business-to-business)

a business sector in ecommerce that allows customers to make transactions with the business ;; B2C

ecommerce between two companies ;; B2B

ecommerce between two companes used a data sharing arrangement called ==electronic data interchange (EDI)==

Most large firms and government agencies apply the B2B concept using ==supply chain management (SCM) software==

refers to all the companies who provide materials, services, and functions needed to provide a product to a customer ;; supply chains

# Modeling Business Operations

overview of a company's mission, functions, organization, products, services, customers, suppliers, competitors, constraints, and future direction. ;; business profile

a business profile is the starting point for the ==modeling process==

specific set of transactions, events, and results that can be described and documented ;; business process

graphically displays one or more business processes, such as handling an airline reservation, filling a product order, or updating a customer account ;; business process model (BPM)

for complex models of business processes, analyts can choose computer-based tools that use ==business process modeling notation (BPMN)==

# Business Information Systems

refers to information systems that support company-wide operations and data management requirements ;; enterprise computing systems

main objective of enterprise computing ;; integrate a company's primary functions (such as production, sales, services, inventory control, and accounting) to improve efficiency, reduce costs, and help managers make key decisions

Applications called ==enterprise resource planning (ERP)== systems provide cost-effective support for users and managers throughout the company. e.g. a car rental company can use ERP to forecast customer demand for rental cars at hundreds of locations

processes data generated by day-to-day business operations ;; transaction processing (TP) systems

transaction processing systems perform a series of tasks whenever a specific ==transaction== occurs

TP systems typically involve large amounts of data and are ==mission-critical== systems because enterprises cannot function without them

provide job-related information support to users at all levels of a company ;; business support systems

These systems can analyze transactional data, generate information needed to manage and control business processes, and provide information that leads to better decision making. ;; business support systems

these systems use a large database called a knowledge base that allows users to find information by entering keywords or questions in normal english phrases ;; knowledge management systems

a knowledge management system uses ==inference rules== which are logical rules that identify ==data patterns and relationships==

a system that provides employees at all levels with technology that improves productivity ;; user productivity systems

user productivity systems include email, voice mail, video and web confer- encing, word processing, automated calendars, database management, spreadsheets, desktop publishing, presentation graphics, company intranets, integrated mobile computing systems, and **groupware**

enables users to share data, collaborate on projects, and work in teams ;; groupware programs

it is important to note that large companies often use ==systems integration== in all of these business information systems to provide services to their users

# Systems Development Tools

produces a graphical representation of a concept or process that systems developers can analyze, test, and modify. ;; modeling

describes the information that a system must provide ;; business model

tests system conepts and provides an opportunity to examine input, output, and user interfaces before final decisions are made ;; prototyping

an early working version of an information system ;; prototype

a technique that uses powerful software to help systems analysts develop and maintain information systems ;; computer-aided systems engineering (CASE) also called computer-aided software engineering

provides an overall framework for systems development and support a wide variety of design methodologies, including structured analysts and object-oriented analysis. ;; CASE tools

# Systems Development Methods

a traditional method of systems development that still is widely used ;; structured analysis

a more recent approach that many analysts prefer ;; object-oriented (O-O) analysis

include the latest trends in software development ;; agile methods/adaptive methods

process of planning, scheduling, monitoring, controlling, and reporting upon the development of an information system ;; project management

**Description**: Represents the system in terms of data and the processes that act upon that data. System development is organized into phases, with deliverables and milestones to measure progress. The waterfall model typically consists of five phases: requirements, design, construction, testing, and maintenance & evolution. Iteration is possible among the phases. ;; Structured Analysis

**Description**: Views the system in terms of objects that combine data and processes. The objects represent actual people, things, transactions, and events. Compared to structural analysis, O-O phases tend to be more interactive. Can use the waterfall model or a model that stresses greater iteration ;; Object-Oriented Analysis

**Description**: Stresses intense team-based effort. Breaks development into cycles, or iterations, that add functionality. Each cycle is designed, built, and tested in an ongoing process. Attempts to reduce major risks by incremental steps in short time intervals ;; Agile Methods

**Modeling Tools**: Data flow diagrams (DFDs) and process descriptions, which are described in Chapter 5. Also, business process modeling. ;; Structured analysis

**Modeling Tools**: Various object-oriented diagrams depict system actors, methods, and messages, which are described in Chapter 6. Also, business process modeling ;; Object-Oriented Analysis

**Modeling Tools**: diagrams depict system actors, methods, and messages, which are described in Chapter 6. Also, business process modeling. Tools that enhance communication, such as collaborative software, brainstorming, and whiteborads. Business process modeling works well with agile methods. ;; Agile Methods

**Pros**: Traditional method that has been very popular over time. Relies heavily on written documentation. Frequent phase iteration can provide flexibility comparable to other methods. Well-suited to traditional project management tools and techniques. ;; Structured Analysis

**Pros**: Integrates easily with object-oriented programming languages. Code is modular and reusable, which can reduce cost and development time. Easy to maintain and expand because new objects can be created using inherited properties. ;; Object-Oriented Analysis

**Pros**: Integrates easily with object-oriented programming languages. Code is modular and reusable, which can reduce cost and development time. Easy to maintain and expand because new objects can be created using inherited properties. ;; Agile Methods

**Cons**: Changes can be costly, especially in later phases. Requirements are defined early, and can change during development. Users might not be able to describe their needs until they can see examples of features and functions. ;; Structured Analysis

**Cons**: Somewhat newer method might be less familiar to development team members. Interaction of objects and classes can be complex in larger systems ;; Object-Oriented Analysis ;; Object-Oriented Analysis

**Cons**: Team members need a high level of technical and communications skills. Lack of structure and documentation can introduce risk factors. Overall project might be subject to scope change as user requirements change. ;; Agile Methods

## Structured Analysis

structured analysis uses a series of phases, called the ==Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC)==, to plan, analyze, design, implement, and support an information system.

Structured analysis is based on an overall plan, similar to a blueprint for constructing a building, so it is called a ==predictive approach==.

structured analysis uses a set of ==process models== to describe a system graphically

shows the data that flows in and out of system processes ;; process model

in a process model, inside each process, input data is transformed by ==business rules== that generate the output

the SDLC follows the ==waterfall model== in this model, the result of each phase is called a ==deliverable==, which flows into the next phase

### Systems Development Life Cycle

this phase usually begins with a formal request to the IT department, called a systems request ;; systems planning phase

describes problems or desired changes in an information system or a business process ;; systems request

the purpose of the systems planning phase is to perform a ==preliminary investigation==

a part of the preliminary investigation that reviews anticipated costs and benefits and recommends a course of action based on operational, technical, economic, and time factors. ;; feasibility study

the purpose of thsi phase is to build a logical model o fthe new system ;; systems analysis phase

first step to systems analysis ;; requirements modeling

the system analyst investigates business processes and documents what the new system must do to satisfy users. ;; requirements modeling

deliverable for the systems analysis phase ;; systems requirements document